# Resources

As I mentioned previously, the point of making this page of ".NET Notes" is I often find the official Microsoft documentation for the .NET ecosystem to often be lacking. While understanding the official documentation is certainly improved by having the knowledge of the previous section, it still can often leave something to be desired. It often mixes together different concepts in confusing ways and can lead to developers mistakenly installing entire frameworks to do quite basic things that could've been done without all the extra overhead and confusion.

Even worse than that, quality or, at the very least, straightforward documentation that does separate and organize content well is often hard to find. Over the course of making this site, I've found some quality sources of documentation from Microsoft, but most of it I had to find by clicking around webpages and exploring Microsoft's websites. Most of the documentation you'll find if you Google for specific things will be outdated, not relevant, or, a lot of the times, both.

Needless to say, I'm of the opinion that the documentation for .NET is certainly lacking. I've found some good stuff, but most of the stuff I've found is not that great, and the good stuff is so hard to find that it can be difficult to know if I'm missing something. In any case, throughout these different chapters, I'll try to link relevant documentation when I'm discussing how to do different things in .NET. However, this documentation may be hard to parse or not feel so relevant because a lot of it is sub-par in my opinion. 

In any case, I did say I've found some quality documentation. And, honestly, half the point of this site is to just have these two links saved in a convenient location, because I find it so hard to find this documentation despite how incredibly useful both sites are. Here's what I've found:

- [C# documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/tour-of-csharp/) - I've been programming in C# for at least a year and a half now, and have tried tirelessly to get resources that explain how to do things in plain C#. For the life of me, I couldn't find a good reference that just explained the syntax of C#. While making this site, I finally looked at the quite nice looking [introductory site for C#](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/languages/csharp), which linked me to [Microsoft's C# documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/?WT.mc_id=dotnet-35129-website), which explains just about everything you'd like to know in pretty good detail. It also has a list of its specifications and draft specifications, a language refrence, a breakdown of different language features and a pretty in-depth getting started tutorial. Needless to say, I would've loved to find this when I started programming in C#, but I didn't find this until I put in the effort to click through Microsoft's marketing materials. I have no idea why the stuff in this documentation never came up in my Google searches.

- [.NET documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/) - Just like the C# docs, I had been Googling different concepts related to .NET for the longest time. Oftentimes my Google searches would leave me frustrated and confused as I would get links to documentation for a bunch of random Microsoft products that also happened to include ".NET" in the name, and could never find straightforward answers to my specific .NET questions. Even if I did find .NET resources, it was often on .NET Full Framework or .NET Core. But, again, just like the C# docs, I decided to look at the nice looking [introductory site for .NET](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/dotnet/what-is-dotnet) when I started working on this site. And, after a bit of link explorations, I found the homepage to the .NET docs, which goes over what .NET is and breaks down a lot of the beginner questions that always eluded me

And, for people who don't work in C#, you may also be interested in the [F# docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fsharp/) or the [Visual Basic docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/visual-basic/).